
















CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S667January 20, 2009
Mr. REED. Mr. President, with re-
spect to the nominations confirmed
today, I ask unanimous consent that
the President be immediately notified
of the Senate’s action and that the
Senate return to legislative session.
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tem-
pore. Without objection, it is so or-
dered.
f
LEGISLATIVE SESSION
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tem-
pore. The Senate will now return to
legislative session.
f
INAUGURAL CEREMONY
Mr. REID. Mr. President, I ask unan-
imous consent that the Inaugural Cere-
mony proceedings be printed in the
RECORD.
There being no objection, the mate-
rial was ordered to be printed in the
R ECORD, as follows:
INAUGURAL C EREMONY
Inauguration of Barack Hussein Obama,
January 20, 2009, 11:30 a.m.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff assembled on the
President’s platform.
The Diplomatic Corps assembled on the
President’s platform.
The Governors of the United States and its
territories and the Mayor of the District of
Columbia assembled on the President’s plat-
form.
Members of the 111th House of Representa-
tives of the United States, led by majority
whip James E. Clyburn and Republican whip
Eric Cantor, assembled on the President’s
platform.
Members of the Senate of the United
States assembled on the President’s plat-
form.
Former Speakers of the House of Rep-
resentatives, Thomas Foley and Newt Ging-
rich, accompanied by Mrs. Foley and Mrs.
Gingrich, assembled on the President’s plat-
form.
Former Vice Presidents Walter Mondale,
Dan Quayle, and Al Gore, accompanied by
Mrs. Mondale, Mrs. Quayle, and Mrs. Gore,
assembled on the President’s platform.
Mr. William M. Daley, Ms. Penny Pritzker,
Mr. John W. Rogers, Jr., Mr. Patrick G.
Ryan, and Ms. Julianna Smoot, cochairs of
the 56th Presidential Inaugural Committee;
and Mr. Emmett S. Beliveau, executive di-
rector of the 56th Presidential Inaugural
Committee, assembled on the President’s
platform.
The President-elect’s Cabinet and agency
designees assembled on the President’s plat-
form.
The Chief Justice of the United States, the
Honorable John G. Roberts, Jr., and the As-
sociate Justices of the Supreme Court of the
United States assembled on the President’s
platform.
The 39th President of the United States,
Jimmy Carter, and Mrs. Rosalynn Carter as-
sembled on the President’s platform.
The 41st President of the United States,
George H.W. Bush, and Mrs. Barbara Bush
assembled on the President’s platform.
The 42nd President of the United States,
William Jefferson Clinton, and Senator Hil-
lary Rodham Clinton assembled on the Presi-
dent’s platform.
The children of the Vice President-elect,
CPT Beau Biden, Hunter Biden, and Ashley
Biden, accompanied by House Chief Adminis-
trative Officer Dan Beard, assembled on the
President’s platform.
Mrs. Marian Robinson and the daughters of
the President-elect, Malia and Sasha Obama,
accompanied by Assistant Secretary of the
Senate Sheila Dwyer, assembled on the
President’s platform.
The First Lady, Mrs. Laura Bush, and the
wife of the Vice President, Mrs. Lynne Che-
ney, accompanied by Secretary Chao, Mrs.
Bennett, Mrs. Boehner, and Republican staff
director of the U.S. Senate Committee on
Rules and Administration, Mary Suit Jones,
assembled on the President’s platform.
Mrs. Michelle Obama and Dr. Jill Biden,
accompanied by the Secretary of the Senate,
Nancy Erickson; the Clerk of the House of
Representatives, Lorraine Miller; Mr. Blum,
Mr. Pelosi, and Mrs. Reid, assembled on the
President’s platform.
The President of the United States, the
Honorable George Walker Bush, and the Vice
President of the United States, Dick Cheney,
accompanied by Senate Republican leader
Mitch McConnell, Senator Robert Bennett,
House Republican leader, Representative
John Boehner, and Secretary for the minor-
ity David Schiappa, assembled on the Presi-
dent’s platform.
The Vice President-elect of the United
States, Joseph R. Biden, Jr., accompanied by
the inaugural coordinator for the Joint Con-
gressional Committee on Inaugural Cere-
monies, Jennifer Griffith; Senate Deputy
Sergeant at Arms Drew Wilson; House Dep-
uty Sergeant at Arms Kerri Hanley; Senate
majority leader, Senator Harry Reid; House
majority leader, Representative Steny
Hoyer, assembled on the President’s plat-
form.
The President-elect of the United States,
Barack H. Obama, accompanied by the staff
director for the Joint Congressional Com-
mittee on Inaugural Ceremonies, Howard
Gantman; the Senate Sergeant at Arms, Ter-
rence W. Gainer; the House Sergeant at
Arms, Wilson Livingood; chairman of the
Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural
Ceremonies, Senator Dianne Feinstein; Sen-
ator Robert Bennett; the Speaker of the
House of Representatives, Nancy Pelosi; the
Senate majority leader, Harry Reid; House
majority leader, Representative Steny
Hoyer; House Republican leader, Representa-
tive John Boehner, assembled on the Presi-
dent’s platform.
Mrs. FEINSTEIN. Mr. President and Vice
President, Mr. President-elect and Vice
President-elect, ladies and gentlemen, wel-
come to the inauguration of the 44th Presi-
dent of the United States of America.
(Applause.)
Mrs. FEINSTEIN. The world is watching
today as our great democracy engages in this
peaceful transition of power. Here on the Na-
tional Mall, where we remember the found-
ers of our Nation and those who fought to
make it free, we gather to etch another line
in the solid stone of history. The freedom of
a people to choose its leaders is the root of
liberty. In a world where political strife is
too often settled with violence, we come here
every 4 years to bestow the power of the
Presidency upon our democratically elected
leader.
Those who doubt the supremacy of the bal-
lot over the bullet can never diminish the
power engendered by nonviolent struggles
for justice and equality like the one that
made this day possible. No triumph tainted
by brutality could ever match the sweet vic-
tory of this hour and of what it means to
those who marched and died to make it a re-
ality. Our work is not yet finished, but fu-
ture generations will mark this morning as
the turning point for real and necessary
change in our Nation. They will look back
and remember that this was the moment
when the dream that once echoed across his-
tory from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial
finally reached the walls of the White House.
(Applause.)
Mrs. FEINSTEIN. In that spirit, we today
not only inaugurate a new administration,
we pledge ourselves to the hope, the vision,
the unity, and the renewed call to greatness
inspired by the 44th President of the United
States, Barack Obama.
(Applause.)
Mrs. FEINSTEIN. Thank you, and God
bless America.
(Applause.)
Mrs. FEINSTEIN. At this time I call upon
Dr. Rick Warren, pastor of the Saddleback
Church in Lake Forest, CA, to provide the
invocation.
Pastor WARREN. Let us pray.
Almighty God, our Father, everything we
see and everything we can’t see exists be-
cause of You alone. It all comes from You. It
all belongs to You. It all exists for Your
glory. History is Your story. The scripture
tells us: Hear, O Israel, the Lord is our God,
the Lord is one. And You are the compas-
sionate and merciful one, and You are loving
to every one You have made. Now, today, we
rejoice, not only in America’s peaceful trans-
fer of power for the 44th time, we celebrate
a hinge point of history, with the inaugura-
tion of our first African-American President
of the United States. We are so grateful to
live in this land, a land of unequaled possi-
bility, where the son of an African American
can rise to the highest level of our leader-
ship. And we know today that Dr. King and
a great cloud of witnesses are shouting in
heaven.
Give to our new President Barack Obama
the wisdom to lead us with humility, the
courage to lead us with integrity, the com-
passion to lead us with generosity. Bless and
protect him, his family, Vice President
Biden, the Cabinet, and every one of our free-
ly elected leaders. Help us, O God, to remem-
ber that we are Americans, united not by
race or religion or blood but to our commit-
ment to freedom and justice for all.
When we focus on ourselves, when we fight
each other, when we forget You, forgive us.
When we presume that our greatness and our
prosperity is ours alone, forgive us. When we
fail to treat our fellow human beings and all
the Earth with the respect that they deserve,
forgive us.
As we face these difficult days ahead, may
we have a new birth of clarity in aims, re-
sponsibility in our actions, humility in our
approaches, and civility in our attitudes,
even when we differ. Help us to share, to
serve, and to seek the common good of all.
May all people of goodwill today join to-
gether to work for a more just, a more
healthy, and a more prosperous nation and a
peaceful planet. And may we never forget
that one day all nations and all people will
stand accountable before You.
We now commit our new President and his
wife Michelle and his daughters, Malia and
Sasha, into Your loving care. I humbly ask
this in the name of the one who changed my
life, Yeshua, Esau, Jesus, Jesus, who taught
us to pray: Our Father, who art in heaven,
hallowed be Thy name. Thy kingdom come.
Thy will be done, on Earth as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive
us our trespasses as we forgive those who
trespass against us. And lead us not into
temptation but deliver us from evil. For
thine is the kingdom and the power and the
glory forever. Amen.
(Applause.)
Mrs. FEINSTEIN. I am so pleased to intro-
duce world renowned musical artist Aretha
Franklin to sing ‘‘My Country Tis of Thee.’’
(Performance by Ms. Aretha Franklin.)
Mrs. FEINSTEIN. Please join me in wel-
coming my colleague from Utah, the Honor-
able Robert Bennett.
Mr. BENNETT. It is my great honor to in-
troduce Associate Justice of the Supreme
VerDate Nov 24 2008 06:29 Mar 03, 2009 Jkt 079060 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\RECORD09\RECFILES\S20JA9.REC S20JA9
mmaher on PROD1PC70 with CONG-REC-ONLINE



CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATES668 January 20, 2009
Court of the United States John Paul Ste-
vens, who will administer the oath of office
to the Vice President-elect. Will you all
please stand.
Associate Justice JOHN PAUL STEVENS
administered to the Vice President-elect the
oath of office prescribed by the Constitution,
which he repeated, as follows:
‘‘I, JOSEPH ROBINETTE BIDEN, JR. do
solemnly swear that I will support and de-
fend the Constitution of the United States
against all enemies foreign and domestic;
that I will bear true faith and allegiance to
the same; that I take this obligation freely,
without any mental reservation or purpose
of evasion, and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties of my office on which I
am about to enter. So help me God.’’
(Applause.)
Mrs. FEINSTEIN. It is my pleasure to in-
troduce a unique musical performance: Mr.
Itzhak Perlman, violinist; Anthony McGill,
clarinet; Yo-Yo Ma, cellist; and Gabriela
Montero, pianist, performing ‘‘Air and Sim-
ple Gifts,’’ a composition arranged for this
occasion by John Williams.
(Performance by Mr. Yo-Yo Ma, Mr. An-
thony McGill, Ms. Gabriela Montero, and Mr.
Itzhak Perlman.)
Mrs. FEINSTEIN. It is my distinct honor
to present the Chief Justice of the United
States, the Honorable John G. Roberts, Jr.,
who will administer the Presidential oath of
office. Everyone, please stand.
The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court,
JOHN G. ROBERTS, JR., administered to
the President-elect the oath of office pre-
scribed by the Constitution, which he re-
peated, as follows:
‘‘I, BARACK HUSSEIN OBAMA, do sol-
emnly swear that I will faithfully execute
the office of President of the United States
and will, to the best of my ability, preserve,
protect, and defend the Constitution of the
United States. So Help me God.’’
THE CHIEF JUSTICE. Congratulations,
Mr. President.
(Applause.)
Mrs. FEINSTEIN. Ladies and gentlemen, it
is my great personal honor to present the
44th President of these United States,
Barack Obama.
(Applause.)
The PRESIDENT. Thank you. Thank you.
My fellow citizens, I stand here today hum-
bled by the task before us, grateful for the
trust you bestowed, mindful of the sacrifices
borne by our ancestors. I thank President
Bush for his service to our Nation, as well as
the generosity and cooperation he has shown
throughout this transition.
Forty-four Americans have now taken the
Presidential oath. The words have been spo-
ken during rising tides of prosperity and the
still waters of peace. Yet, every so often, the
oath is taken amidst gathering clouds and
raging storms. At these moments, America
has carried on not simply because of the
skill or vision of those in high office but be-
cause we, the people, have remained faithful
to the ideals of our forebears and true to our
founding documents. So it has been. So it
must be with this generation of Americans.
That we are in the midst of crisis is now
well understood. Our Nation is at war
against a far-reaching network of violence
and hatred. Our economy is badly weakened,
a consequence of greed and irresponsibility
on the part of some but also our collective
failure to make hard choices and prepare the
Nation for a new age. Homes have been lost;
jobs shed; businesses shuttered. Our health
care is too costly; our schools fail too many;
and each day brings further evidence that
the ways we use energy strengthen our ad-
versaries and threaten our planet. These are
the indicators of crisis, subject to data and
statistics. Less measurable but no less pro-
found is a sapping of confidence across our
land, a nagging fear that America’s decline
is inevitable, that the next generation must
lower its sights.
Today I say to you that the challenges we
face are real. They are serious, and they are
many. They will not be met easily or in a
short span of time. But know this, America—
they will be met.
(Applause.)
On this day, we gather because we have
chosen hope over fear, unity of purpose over
conflict and discord. On this day, we come to
proclaim an end to the petty grievances and
false promises, the recriminations and
wornout dogmas that for far too long have
strained our politics. We remain a young Na-
tion, but in the words of scripture: The time
has come to set aside childish things. The
time has come to reaffirm our enduring spir-
it, to choose our better history, to carry for-
ward that precious gift, that noble idea
passed on from generation to generation, the
God-given promise that all are equal, all are
free, and all deserve a chance to pursue their
full measure of happiness.
(Applause.)
In reaffirming the greatness of our Nation,
we understand that greatness is never a
given. It must be earned. Our journey has
never been one of shortcuts or settling for
less. It has not been the path for the faint-
hearted, for those who prefer leisure over
work or seek only the pleasures of riches and
fame. Rather, it has been the risk takers, the
doers, the makers of things, some celebrated
but more often men and women obscure in
their labor who have carried us up the long
rugged path towards prosperity and freedom.
For us, they packed up their few worldly pos-
sessions and traveled across oceans in search
of a new life. For us, they toiled in sweat-
shops and settled the West, endured the lash
of the whip, and plowed the hard earth. For
us, they fought and died in places like Con-
cord and Gettysburg, Normandy and Khe
Sahn.
Time and again, these men and women
struggled and sacrificed and worked until
their hands were raw so that we might live a
better life. They saw America as bigger than
the sum of our individual ambitions, greater
than all the differences of birth or wealth or
faction.
This is the journey we continue today. We
remain the most prosperous, powerful Nation
on Earth. Our workers are no less productive
than when this crisis began. Our minds are
no less inventive, our goods and services no
less needed than they were last week or last
month or last year. Our capacity remains
undiminished, and our time of standing pat
and protecting narrow interests and putting
off unpleasant decisions—that time has sure-
ly passed. Starting today, we must pick our-
selves up, dust ourselves off, and begin again
the work of remaking America.
(Applause.)
For everywhere we look, there is work to
be done. The state of our economy calls for
action, bold and swift. And we will act, not
only to create new jobs but to lay a new
foundation for growth. We will build the
roads and bridges, the electric grids and dig-
ital lines that feed our commerce and bind us
together. We will restore science to its right-
ful place and wield technology’s wonders to
raise health care’s quality and lower its cost.
We will harness the Sun and the winds and
the soil to fuel our cars and run our fac-
tories. And we will transform our schools
and colleges and universities to meet the de-
mands of a new age. All this we can do. All
this we will do.
Now, there are some who question the
scale of our ambitions, who suggest that our
system cannot tolerate too many big plans.
Their memories are short. For they have for-
gotten what this country has already done,
what free men and women can achieve when
imagination is joined to common purpose
and necessity to courage. What the cynics
fail to understand is that the ground has
shifted beneath them, that the stale political
arguments that have consumed us for so long
no longer apply.
The question we ask today is not whether
our Government is too big or too small but
whether it works—whether it helps families
find jobs at a decent wage, care they can af-
ford, a retirement that is dignified. Where
the answer is, yes, we intend to move for-
ward. Where the answer is no, programs will
end. Those of us who manage the public’s
dollars will be held to account—to spend
wisely, reform bad habits, and do our busi-
ness in the light of day—because only then
can we restore the vital trust between a peo-
ple and their Government.
Nor is the question before us whether the
market is a force for good or ill. Its power to
generate wealth and expand freedom is un-
matched. But this crisis has reminded us
that without a watchful eye, the market can
spin out of control and that a nation cannot
prosper long when it favors only the pros-
perous. The success of our economy has al-
ways depended not just on the size of our
gross domestic product but on the reach of
our prosperity, on the ability to extend op-
portunity to every willing heart—not out of
charity but because it is the surest route to
our common good.
(Applause.)
As for our common defense, we reject as
false the choice between our safety and our
ideals. Our Founding Fathers, faced with
perils that we can scarcely imagine, drafted
a charter to assure the rule of law and the
rights of man, a charter expanded by the
blood of generations. Those ideals still light
the world, and we will not give them up for
expedience sake. And so to all the other peo-
ples and governments who are watching
today, from the grandest capitals to the
small village where my father was born,
know that America is a friend of each nation
and every man, woman, and child who seeks
a future of peace and dignity and that we are
ready to lead once more.
(Applause.)
Recall that earlier generations faced down
fascism and communism not just with mis-
siles and tanks but with sturdy alliances and
enduring convictions. They understood that
our power alone cannot protect us, nor does
it entitle us to do as we please. Instead, they
knew that our power grows through its pru-
dent use. Our security emanates from the
justness of our cause, the force of our exam-
ple, the tempering qualities of humility and
restraint. We are the keepers of this legacy.
Guided by these principles once more, we can
meet those new threats that demand even
greater effort, even greater cooperation and
understanding between nations.
We will begin to responsibly leave Iraq to
its people and forge a hard-earned peace in
Afghanistan. With old friends and former
foes, we will work tirelessly to lessen the nu-
clear threat and roll back the specter of a
warming planet. We will not apologize for
our way of life, nor will we waiver in its de-
fense. And for those who seek to advance
their aims by inducing terror and slaugh-
tering innocents, we say to you now that our
spirit is stronger and cannot be broken. You
cannot outlast us, and we will defeat you.
(Applause.)
For we know that our patchwork heritage
is a strength, not a weakness. We are a na-
tion of Christians and Muslims, Jews and
Hindus, and nonbelievers. We are shaped by
every language and culture, drawn from
every end of this Earth. And because we have
tasted the bitter swill of civil war and seg-
regation and emerged from that dark chap-
ter stronger and more united, we cannot help
VerDate Nov 24 2008 06:29 Mar 03, 2009 Jkt 079060 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\RECORD09\RECFILES\S20JA9.REC S20JA9
mmaher on PROD1PC70 with CONG-REC-ONLINE




